Secure C Programming


Various CERT guidelines and rules apply to this chapter's topics. For more information
on each, visit cert.org.


CERT Guidelines for structs

As we discussed in Section 10.2.4, the boundary alignment requirements for struct members
may result in extra bytes containing undefined data for each struct variable you create.
Each of the following guidelines is related to this issue:

   * EXP03-C: Because of boundary alignment requirements, the size of a struct variable
     is not necessarily the sum of its members' sizes. Always use sizeof to determine
	 the number of bytes in a struct variable. As you'll see, we use this technique to
	 manipulate fixed-length records that are written to and read from files in Chapter 11,
	 and to create so-called dynamic data structures in Chapter 12.
	 
   * EXP04-C: As we discussed in Section 10.2.4, struct variables cannot be compared for
     equality or inequality, because they might contain bytes of undefined data. 
	 Therefore, you must compare their individual members.
	 
   * DCL39-C: In a struct variable, the undefined extra bytes could contain secure data,
     left over from prior use of those memory locations, that should not be accessible.
	 This CERT guideline discusses compiler-specific mechanisms for packing the data to
	 eliminate these extra bytes.


CERT Guideline for typedef

   * DCL05-C: Complex type declarations, such as those for function pointers, can be 
     difficult to read. You should use typedef to create self-documenting type names that
	 make your programs more readable.


CERT Guidelines for Bit Manipulation

   * INT02-C: As a result of the integer promotion rules (discussed in Section 5.6),
     performing bitwise operations on integer types smaller than int can lead to
	 unexpected results. Explicit casts are required to ensure correct results.
	 
   * INT13-C: Some bitwise operations on signed integer types are implementation
     defined, this means that the operations may have different results across C
	 compilers. For this reason, unsigned integer types should be used with the 
	 bitwise operators.
	 
   * EXP46-C: The logical operators && and || are frequently confused with the 
     bitwise operators & and |, respectively. Using & and | in the condition of a
	 conditional expression (?:) can lead to unexpected behavior, because the 
	 & and | operators do not use short-circuit evaluation.


CERT Guideline for enum

   * INT09-C: Allowing multiple enumeration constants to have the same value can result
     in difficult-to-find logic errors. In most cases, an enum's enumeration constants
	 should each have unique values to help prevent such logic errors.