Secure C Programming


Bounds Checking for Array Indeces

It's important to ensure that every index you use to access an array element is within the 
array's bounds. A one-dimensional array's indices must be greater than or equal o 0 and
less than the number of array elements. A two-dimensional array's row and column indices
must be greater than or equal to 0 and less than the numbers of rowns and columns,
respectively. This extends to arrays with additional dimensions as well.

Allowing programs to read from or write to array elements outside the bounds of arrays
are common security flaws. Reading from out-of-bounds array elements can cause a program
to crash or even appear to execute correctly while using bad data. Writing to an out-of-bounds
element (known as a buffer overflow) can corrupt a program's data in memory, crash a 
program and allow attackers to exploit the system and execute their own code.

As we stated in the chapter, C provides no automatic bounds checking for arrays, so you
must provide your own. For techniques that help you prevent such problems, see CERT
guideline ARR30-C.


scanf_s

Bounds checking is also important in string processing. When reading a string into a char
array, scanf does not prevent buffer overflows. If the number of characters input is greater
than or equal to the array's length, scanf will write characters, including the string's
terminating null character ('\0'), beyond the end of the array. This might overwrite other
variables' values. In addition, if the program writes to those other variables, it might
overwrite the string's '\0'.

A function determines where a string ends by looking for its terminating '\0' character.
For example, recall that function printf outputs a string by reading characters from the
beginning of the string in memory and continuing until it encounters the string's '\0'.
If the '\0' is missing, printf continues reading from memory until it encounters some later
'\0' in memory. This can lead to strange results or cause a program to crash.

The C11 standard's optional Annex K provides new, more secure, versions of many string-processing
and input/output functions. When reading a string into a character array function scanf_s
performs additional checks to ensure that it does not write beyond the end of the array.
Assuming that myString is a 20-character array, the statement

      scanf_s("%19s", myString, 20);

reads a string into myString. Function scanf_s requires two arguments for each %s in the 
format string:

   * a character array in which to place the input string and
   * the array's number of elements.
   
The function uses the number of elements to prevent buffer overflows. For example, it's 
possible to supply a field width for %s that's too long for the underlying character array, or
to simply omit the field width entirely. With scanf_s, if the number of characters input
plus the terminating null character is larger than the number of array elements specified,
the %s conversion fails. For the preceding statement, which contains only one conversion
specifier, scanf_s would return 0 indicating that no conversions were performed, and the
array myString would be unaltered.

In general, if your compiler supports the functions from the C standard's optional
Annex K, you should use them. We discuss additional Annex K functions in later Secure C
Programming sections.


Don't Use Strings Read from the User as Format-Control Strings

You might have noticed that throughout this book, we do not use single-argument printf
statements. Instead we use one of the following forms:

   * When we need to output a '\n' after the string, we use function puts (which
     automatically outputs a '\n' after its single string argument), as in
	 
      puts("Welcome to C!");
	  
   * When we need the cursor to remain on the same line as the string, we use function
     printf, as in

      printf("%s", "Enter first integer: ");
	  
Because we were displaying string literals, we certainly could have used the one-argument
form of printf, as in

      printf("Welcome to C!\n");
	  printf("Enter first integer: ");
	  
When printf evaluates the format-control string in its first (and possibly its only argument,
the function performs tasks based on the conversion specifier(s) in that string. If the 
format-control string were obtained from the user, an attacker could supply malicious
conversion specifiers that would be "executed" by the formatted output function. Now that you
know how to read strings into character arrays, it's important to note that you should 
never use as a printf's format-control string a character array that might contain user input.
For more information, see CERT guideline FIO30-C.