Secure C Programming


Checking Function scanf's Return Value

Figure 4.6 used the math library function pow, which calculates the value of its first argu-
ment raised to the power of its second argument and returns the result as a double value.
The calculation's result was then used in the statement that called pow.

Many functions return values indicating whether they executed successfully. For example,
function scanf returns an int indicating whether the input operation was successfull.
If an input failure occurs, scanf returns the value EOF (defined in <stdio.h>); otherwise,
it returns the number of items that were read. If this value does not match the number
you intended to read, then scanf was unable to complete the input operation.

Consider the following statement from Fig. 3.6:

      scanf("%d", &grade);
	  
which expects to read one int value. If the user enters an integer, scanf returns 1 indicating
that one value was indeed read. If the user enters a string, such as "hello", scanf returns 0
indicating that it was unable to read the input as an integer. In this case, the variable 
grade does not receive a value.

Function scanf can read multiple inputs, as in

      scanf("%d%d", &number1, &number2);
	  
If the input is successfull, scanf will return 2, indicating that two values were read. If the
user enters a string for the first value, scanf will return 0 and neither number 1 nor number 2
will receive a value. If the user enters an integer followed by a string, scanf will return 1
and only number 1 will receive a value.


Range Checking

Even if a scanf operates successfully, the values read might still be invalid. For example, 
grades are tipically integers in the range 0-100. In a program that inputs such grades, you
should validate the grades by using range checking to ensure that they are values from 0
to 100. You can then ask the user to reenter any value that's out of range. If a program
requires inputs from a specific set of values (e.g., nonsequential product codes), you can
ensure that each input matches a value in the set. For more information, see Chapter 5,
"Integer Security", of Robert Seacord's book Secure Coding in C and C++, 2/e.