Secure C Programming


printf_s, scanf_s and Other Secure Functions

Eariles Secure C Programming sections presented printf_s and scanf_s, and mentioned
other more secure versions of standard library functions that are described by Annex K of
the C standard. A key feature of functions like printf_s and scanf_s that makes them
more secure is that they have runtime constraints requiring their pointer arguments to be
non-NULL. The functions check these runtime constraings before attempting to use the
pointers. Any NULL pointer argument is considered to be a constraint violation and causes
the function to fail and return a status notification. In a scanf_s, if any of the pointer
arguments (including the format-control string) are NULL, the function returns EOF. In a 
printf_s, if the format-control string or any argument that corresponds to a %s is NULL,
the function stops outputting data and returns a negative number. For complete details of 
the Annex K functions, see the C standard document or your compiler's library documentation.


Other CERT Guidelines Regarding Pointers

Misused pointers lead to many of the most common security vulnerabilities in systems today.
CERT provides various guidelines to help you prevent such problems. If you're builduing
industrial-strength C systems, you should familiarize yourself with the CERT C Secure
Coding Standard at cert.org. The following guidelines apply to pointer programming
techniques that we presented in this chapter:

   * EXP34-C: Dereferencing NULL pointers typically causes programs to crash, but CERT has
     encountered cases in which dereferencing NULL pointers can allow attackers to
	   execute code.
	 
   * DCL13-C: Section 7.5 discussed uses of const with pointers. If a function parameters
     points to a value that will not be changed by the function, const should be used
     to indicate that the data is constant. For example, to represent a pointer to a 
     string that will not be modified, use const char * as the pointer parameter's type,
     as in line 21 of Fig. 7.11.
	
   * MSC16-C: This guideline discusses techniques for encrypting function pointers to 
     help prevent attackers from overwriting them and executing attack code.