Secure C Programming


fprintf_s and fscanf_s

The examples in Sections 11.3-11.4 used functions fprintf and fscanf to write text to and 
read text from files, respectively. The new standard's Annex K provides more secure versions
of these functions named fprintf_s and fscanf_s that are identical to the printf_s and
scanf_s functions we've previously introduced, except that you also specify a FILE pointer
argument indicating the file to manipulate. If your C compiler's standard libraries include
these functions, you should use them instead of fprintf and fscanf. As with scanf_s and
printf_s, Microsoft's versions of fprintf_s and fscanf_s differ from those in Annex K.


Chapter 9 of the CERT Secure C Coding Standard

Chapter 9 of the CERT Secure C Codng Standard is dedicated to input/output recommendations
and rules, many apply to file processing in general and several of these apply to the
file-processing functions presented in this chapter. For more information on each, visit
cert.org.

   * FIO03-C: When opening a file for writing using the nonexclusive file-open modes, if the
     file exists, function fopen opens it and truncates its contents, providing no indication
	 of whether the file existed before the fopen call. To ensure that an existing file is not
	 opened and truncated, you can use C11's new exclusive write mode, which allows fopen to
	 open the file only if it does not already exist.
	 
   * FIO04-C: In industrial-strength code, you should always check the return values of
     file-processing functions that return error indicators to ensure that the functions 
	 performed their tasks correctly.
	
   * FIO07-C: Function rewind does not return a value, so you cannot test whether the operation
     was successful. It's recommended instead that you use function fseek, because it returns
	 a nonzero value if it fails.
	
   * FIO09-C: We demonstrated both text files and binary files in this chapter. Due to
     differences in binary data representations accross platforms, files written in binary
	 format often are not portable. For more portable file representations, consider using
	 text files or a function library that can handle the differences in binary file 
	 representations accross platforms.

   * FIO14-C: Some library functions do not operate identically on text files and binary files.
     In particular, function fseek is not guaranteed to work correctly with binary files if you
	 seek from SEEK_END, so SEEK_SET should be used.
	 
   * FIO42-C: On many platforms, you can have only a limited number of files open at once.
     For this reason, you should always close a file as soon as it's no longer needed by 
	 your program.