Secure C Programming


Arithmetic Overflow

Figure 2.5 presented an addition program which calculated the sum of two int values (line
18) with the statement

      sum = integer1 + integer2;

Even this simple statement has a potential problem, adding the integers could result in a
value that's too large to store in an int variable. This is known as arithmetic overflow and
can cause undefined behavior, possibly leaving a system open to attack.

The platform-specific maximum and minimum values that can be stored in an int 
variable are represented by the constants INT_MAX and INT_MIN, respectively, which are
defined in the header <limits.h>. There are similar constants for the other integral types
that we'll be introducing in Chapter 4. You can see your platform's values for these con-
stants by opening the header <limits.h> in a text editor.

It's considered a good practice to ensure that before you perform arithmetic calculations
like the one in line 18 of Fig. 2.5, they will not overflow. The code for doing this is shown
on the CERT website, just search for guideline "INT32-C".
The code uses the && (logical AND) and || (logical OR) operators, which we discuss in 
Chapter 4. In industrial-strenght code, you should perform checks like these for all calcula-
tions. Later chapters show other programming techniques for handling such errors.


Unsigned Integers

In Fig. 3.6, line 8 declared as an unsigned int the variable counter because it's used to
count only non-negative values. In general, counters that should store only non-negative
values should be declared with unsigned before the integer type. Variables of unsigned
types can represent values from 0 to approximately twice the positive range of the corre-
sponding signed integer types. You can determine your platform's maximum unsigned
int value with the constant UINT_MAX from <limits.h>.

The class-averaging program in Fig. 3.6 could have declared as unsigned int the vari-
ables grade, total and average. Grades are normally values from 0 to 100, so the total 
and average should each be greater than or equal to 0. We declared those variables as ints
because we can't control what the user actually enters, the user could enter negative
values. Worse yet, the user could enter a value that's not even a number. (We'll show how
to deal with such inputs later in the book).

Sometimes sentinel-controlled loops use invalid values to terminate a loop. For example, 
the class-averaging program of Fig. 3.8 terminates the loop when the user enters
the sentinel -1 (an invalid grade), so it would be improper to declare variable grade as an
unsigned int. As you'll see, the end-of-file (EOF) indicator, which is introduced in the
next chapter and is often used to terminate sentinel-controlled loops, is also a negative
number. For more information, see Chapter 5, "Integer Security" of robert Seacord's
book Secure Coding in C and C++, 2/e.


scanf_s and printf_s

The C11 standard's Annex K introduces more secure versions of printf and scanf called
printf_s and scanf_s, we discuss these functions and the corresponding security issues in
Sections 6.13 and 7.13. Annex K is designated as optional, so not every C vendor will im-
plement it . Microsoft implemented its own versions of printf_s and scanf_s prior to the
publication of the C11 standard, and its compiler immediately began issuing warnings for
every scanf call. The warnings say that scanf is deprecated, it should no longer be used,
and that you should consider using scanf_s instead.